---
layout: post
title: "Welcome to xGuff"
subtitle: ""
date: 2025-04-16
author: Thomas Aston
---

The year is 2025. You're sat in the pub, watching the match. Dominik Szoboszlai has just nailed one from 30 yards out. It's on its way to nestling in the top corner - but wait, Onana has just tipped it over, it's a corner! There's a minute left on the clock, you're on the edge of your seat, spellbound by the deluge of drama that is the beautiful game. 

"What do you think Otis, can we do this?!" you exclaim. You are absolutely captivated. Live sport is theatre at its finest, how could anyone possibly predict what's coming next?

"Otis?!"

Otis completes a micro-sip of his £8.50 pint of Beavertown Plasma Drizzle, the same one he ordered on arrival, looking up at you over his Macbook Pro - the latest article from The Athletic splayed across the screen. 

"The xG per 100 corners in the Premier League this season is only 3.6, but Manchester United do have the highest goals conceded per 100 corners at 7.2. Their counter attacking threat isn't bad, but nothing special, with 3.3 counter-attacks per 100 defensive corners, so we should be safe in that sense. To answer your question, I think there is a non-zero chance of us winning this but we need to exercise caution. Mathematically speaking, it's just not-"

The corner is taken.

A scramble, chaos in the box, and then-

Carnage.

Van Dijk catches the loose ball on the volley and it's smashed into the roof of the net. The place erupts, you're on your feet, noises coming out of you that a rare bird breed would be proud of. 

Otis on the other hand, is in his chair, frantically refreshing Understat.

"Well... the post-shot xG on that was 0.05. Ridiculous conversion rate. Completely unsustainable. Not even-"

And so on. This is what watching football has become about to so many: the stats, the charts, the predictive models. 

The twist: I am Otis. And probably, if you've ended up here, so are you. We are ruining the magic of live sport. We’re there, pint in hand, heart in mouth, pretending we’re above the chaos because we’ve memorised percentile ranks and pressing efficiency metrics. We speak in decimal places. We wince at poor shot selection more than poor defending. We cheer, but we also tab over to FBref to see if it was deserved.

xGuff is the antidote to this. Rather than putting your friends to sleep with the latest pitch control metric, tell them what they really want to know: IS there a correlation between baldness and managerial win percentage?

The graphs will be beautiful, the conclusions will be questionable, and the only peer reviews that will matter are the discussions at the pub. You might not find data that any club analyst would ever be interested in, but you will find joy. Stay tuned for half-baked theories, coming soon.